What was to speak in Spanish?
Ablar.
I spoke.
Able.
And he spoke, she spoke, you formal spoke.
ABlo.
Ablow, good.
We spoke is ablamos, which I'm sure you've noticed is exactly the same as the present we speak.
So ablamos means we speak or we spoke, which for one side is wonderful because it means you get another version of this very irregular tense.
without having to to remember a new one.
But of course it can cause some ambiguity and in real life it can cause some ambiguity.
Not often mind because most of the time you have some context
Showing that you're talking about the past.
For example, the word for when is quando.
Quando.
So if you want to say when we speak,
I understand everything.
What was to understand?
Comprender.
So when we speak, I understand everything.
So cuando hablamos that bit could be when we speak generally or when we spoke
So that second half brings us into the context and we understand that when we speak generally speaking, I understand everything.
Quando hablamos, comprendo todo.
But if you wanted to say when we spoke, I understood.
everything then of course the first bit is going to be the same but that second bit I understood everything is going to give you that context so let's practice that one when we spoke I understood everything
Very good.
Cuando hablamos, comprendí todo.
So again, the second part of that sentence is making it clear whether this hablamos is the present or the past.
Cuando hablamos, comprendo todo.
Cuando hablamos, comprendí todo.
We spoke yesterday.
Ablamos ayer.
And we know that we can use the present with future context.
in Spanish.
So if you wanted to say we will speak tomorrow, hablamos mañana
So hablamos ayer we spoke yesterday.
Hablamos manana we will speak tomorrow.
How would you say we wait a lot?
We wait a lot generally.
What is a lot in Spanish?
Mucho.
Good.
To wait or to hope?
Esperar.
If you forget this one you can think of desperate, which means unhoped.
desesperado in Spanish.
Again, one of these ado ido adjectives from the version that comes after haber.
You can see desesperar, desesperado, which made desperate.
And it's desesperado in Spanish, not desperado, like we have uh some Spanishisms that say that have entered English, but they can enter incorrectly, like desperado
is desesperado in Spanish or in English you might hear no problema.
This is loosely based on Spanish, but of course
problem in Spanish is problema, not problema.
And actually you would say ningún problema, not no problema.
So, esperar to wait or to hope.
So talking generally, we wait a lot.
We wait around a lot
Esperamos mucho.
Maybe you meant yesterday.
No?
Here it might be ambiguous unless the context is clear.
So if you want to clarify, you might want to say the word yesterday.
How would you say we waited a lot yesterday?
Esperamos mucho ayer.
Good.
What was to eat?
Comer.
And what is we eat?
Comemos.
We eat is comimos.
Comimos.
We ate.
We didn't eat.
No comimos.
What was to live?
And we live generally and we lived
Vivimos.
So what this means is that because of this one difference we have in the entire language.
between er and ir verbs in the present we have emos for er and emos for ir.
What that means is that when we go into the past ir verbs stay the same bivimos vivimos
But errorbs are different.
Comemos, comimos.
So, what was to see?
Ver.
And we see in the present.
Vemos.
And we saw.
Vimos.
Good.
What was to go out or to leave?
Salir.
Good.
We're going out or we're leaving?
Salimos.
Good.
And we went out or we left?
Salimos the same.
What was to lose?
Perder.
We lose.
Perdemos.
Good.
We lost.
Perdimos.
Good.
How would you say we got lost or we lost ourselves?
Nos perdimos.
Good.
Okay, so how would you say we always get lost, but we didn't get lost yesterday?
First thing, what was the word for always?
Siempre.
So how would you say we always get lost?
Siempre perdemos.
Good siempre nos perdemos or nos perdemos siempre.
But we didn't get lost yesterday.
No perdimos a no nos perdimos ayer.
Good
Nos perdemos siempre, pero no nos perdimos ayer.
Very good.
Then we see in that sentence, perdemos for present and perdimos.
for past.
But of course with ear verbs they have the same version for both.
So we could say, for example, we don't go out often, but we went out yesterday.
And often is Amenudo.
A menudo.
Menudo is like a literary word that's not used very often for small related to minute actually or minuscule.
It's not used very often in that sense.
in the sense of small.
But amenudo is used very often to mean often.
So we don't go out often
No salimos a menudo.
But we went out yesterday.
Pero salimos ayer.
Good.
Very good.
So here we have the present and the past in this sentence and we see that both of them are salimos.
No salimos a menudo, pero salimos ayer.
Let's make a recap.
So let's do it with Ablar and Khmer, which we will use as our hook verbs.
So I spoke.
He spoke.
We spoke Ablamos.
And comer is to eat, so I ate
Come, he ate comio, we ate comimos very good